src/Ledger/Conway/Specification/Utxow.lagda.md, before:

---
source_branch: master
source_path: src/Ledger/Conway/Specification/Utxow.lagda
---

# Witnessing {#sec:witnessing}

The purpose of witnessing is make sure the intended action is authorized
by the holder of the signing key. (For details see [CVG19](#shelley-ledger-spec).)
The [Witnessing Functions][] section defines functions used for witnessing.
`witsVKeyNeeded`{.AgdaFunction} and `scriptsNeeded`{.AgdaFunction} are now defined by
projecting the same information out of `credsNeeded`{.AgdaFunction}.  Note that the
last component of `credsNeeded`{.AgdaFunction} adds the script in the
proposal policy only if it is present.

<!--
```agda
{-# OPTIONS --safe #-}

open import Ledger.Prelude
open import Ledger.Core.Specification.Crypto
open import Ledger.Conway.Specification.Abstract
open import Ledger.Conway.Specification.Transaction

module Ledger.Conway.Specification.Utxow
  (txs : _) (open TransactionStructure txs)
  (abs : AbstractFunctions txs) (open AbstractFunctions abs)
  where
open import Ledger.Conway.Specification.Utxo txs abs
open import Ledger.Conway.Specification.Script.Validation txs abs
open import Ledger.Conway.Specification.Certs govStructure
```
-->

`allowedLanguages`{.AgdaFunction} has additional conditions for new
features in Conway. If a transaction contains any votes, proposals, a
treasury donation or asserts the treasury amount, it is only allowed to
contain Plutus V3 scripts. Additionally, the presence of reference
scripts or inline scripts does not prevent Plutus V1 scripts from being
used in a transaction anymore. Only inline datums are now disallowed
from appearing together with a Plutus V1 script.


## Witnessing Functions {#sec:witnessing-functions}

<!--
```agda
module _ (o : TxOut) where
  d = proj₁ (proj₂ (proj₂ o))
  data HasInlineDatum : Set where
    InlineDatum  : ∀ {d'} → d ≡ just (inj₁ d') → HasInlineDatum

instance
  Dec-HasInlineDatum : ∀ {o} → HasInlineDatum o ⁇
  Dec-HasInlineDatum {_ , _ , just (inj₁ x) , _} = ⁇ yes (InlineDatum refl)
  Dec-HasInlineDatum {_ , _ , just (inj₂ x) , _} = ⁇ no λ where
    (InlineDatum x) → case x of λ ()
  Dec-HasInlineDatum {_ , _ , nothing , _} = ⁇ no λ where
    (InlineDatum x) → case x of λ ()

module _ (txb : TxBody) (let open TxBody txb) where
  data UsesV3Features : Set where
    HasVotes : txGovVotes ≢ [] → UsesV3Features
    HasProps : txGovProposals ≢ [] → UsesV3Features
    HasDonation : txDonation ≢ 0 → UsesV3Features
    HasTreasure : currentTreasury ≢ nothing → UsesV3Features

instance
  Dec-UsesV3Features : ∀ {txb} → UsesV3Features txb ⁇
  Dec-UsesV3Features {record { txGovVotes = [] ; txGovProposals = [] ; txDonation = zero ; currentTreasury = nothing }}
    = ⁇ no λ where (HasVotes x)    → x refl
                   (HasProps x)    → x refl
                   (HasDonation x) → x refl
                   (HasTreasure x) → x refl
  Dec-UsesV3Features {record { txGovVotes = [] ; txGovProposals = [] ; txDonation = zero ; currentTreasury = just x }}
    = ⁇ yes (HasTreasure (λ ()))
  Dec-UsesV3Features {record { txGovVotes = [] ; txGovProposals = [] ; txDonation = suc txDonation }}
    = ⁇ yes (HasDonation (λ ()))
  Dec-UsesV3Features {record { txGovVotes = [] ; txGovProposals = x ∷ txGovProposals }} = ⁇ yes (HasProps (λ ()))
  Dec-UsesV3Features {record { txGovVotes = x ∷ txGovVotes }} = ⁇ yes (HasVotes (λ ()))

languages : Tx → UTxO → ℙ Language
languages tx utxo = mapPartial getLanguage (txscripts tx utxo)
  where
    getLanguage : Script → Maybe Language
    getLanguage (inj₁ _) = nothing
    getLanguage (inj₂ s) = just (language s)
```
-->

```agda
allowedLanguages : Tx → UTxO → ℙ Language
allowedLanguages tx utxo =
  if (∃[ o ∈ os ] isBootstrapAddr (proj₁ o))
    then ∅
  else if UsesV3Features txb
    then fromList (PlutusV3 ∷ [])
  else if ∃[ o ∈ os ] HasInlineDatum o
    then fromList (PlutusV2 ∷ PlutusV3 ∷ [])
  else
    fromList (PlutusV1 ∷ PlutusV2 ∷ PlutusV3 ∷ [])
  where
    txb = tx .Tx.body; open TxBody txb
    os = range (outs txb) ∪ range (utxo ∣ (txIns ∪ refInputs))
```

## The <span class="AgdaDatatype">UTXOW</span> Transition System {#sec:the-utxow-transition-system}

<!--
```agda

private variable
  Γ     : UTxOEnv
  s s'  : UTxOState
  tx    : Tx

open UTxOState
```
-->

```agda
data _⊢_⇀⦇_,UTXOW⦈_ : UTxOEnv → UTxOState → Tx → UTxOState → Type where

  UTXOW-inductive :
    let  open Tx tx renaming (body to txb); open TxBody txb; open TxWitnesses wits
         utxo                = s .utxo
         witsKeyHashes       = mapˢ hash (dom vkSigs)
         witsScriptHashes    = mapˢ hash scripts
         refScriptHashes     = mapˢ hash (refScripts tx utxo)
         neededScriptHashes  = mapPartial (isScriptObj  ∘ proj₂) (credsNeeded utxo txb)
         neededVKeyHashes    = mapPartial (isKeyHashObj ∘ proj₂) (credsNeeded utxo txb)
         txdatsHashes        = mapˢ hash txdats
         inputsDataHashes    = mapPartial (λ txout →  if txOutToP2Script utxo tx txout
                                                      then txOutToDataHash txout
                                                      else nothing) (range (utxo ∣ txIns))
         refInputsDataHashes = mapPartial txOutToDataHash (range (utxo ∣ refInputs))
         outputsDataHashes   = mapPartial txOutToDataHash (range txOuts)
         nativeScripts       = mapPartial toP1Script (txscripts tx utxo)
    in
    ∙  ∀[ (vk , σ) ∈ vkSigs ] isSigned vk (txidBytes txId) σ
    ∙  ∀[ s ∈ nativeScripts ] (hash s ∈ neededScriptHashes → validP1Script witsKeyHashes txVldt s)
    ∙  neededVKeyHashes ⊆ witsKeyHashes
    ∙  neededScriptHashes - refScriptHashes ≡ᵉ witsScriptHashes
    ∙  inputsDataHashes ⊆ txdatsHashes
    ∙  txdatsHashes ⊆ inputsDataHashes ∪ outputsDataHashes ∪ refInputsDataHashes
    ∙  languages tx utxo ⊆ allowedLanguages tx utxo
    ∙  txADhash ≡ map hash txAD
    ∙  Γ ⊢ s ⇀⦇ tx ,UTXO⦈ s'
       ────────────────────────────────
       Γ ⊢ s ⇀⦇ tx ,UTXOW⦈ s'
```

<!--
```agda
pattern UTXOW-inductive⋯ p₁ p₂ p₃ p₄ p₅ p₆ p₇ p₈ h
      = UTXOW-inductive (p₁ , p₂ , p₃ , p₄ , p₅ , p₆ , p₇ , p₈ , h)
pattern UTXOW⇒UTXO x = UTXOW-inductive⋯ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ x

unquoteDecl UTXOW-inductive-premises =
  genPremises UTXOW-inductive-premises (quote UTXOW-inductive)
```
-->


## Plutus script context

[CIP-0069](https://cips.cardano.org/cip-0069) unifies the arguments
given to all types of Plutus scripts currently available: spending,
certifying, rewarding, minting, voting, proposing.

The formal specification permits running spending scripts in the absence
datums in the Conway era. However, since the interface with Plutus is
kept abstract in this specification, changes to the representation of
the script context which are part of
[CIP-0069](https://cips.cardano.org/cip-0069) are not included here. To
provide a [CIP-0069](https://cips.cardano.org/cip-0069)-conformant
implementation of Plutus to this specification, an additional step
processing the `List`{.AgdaDatatype} `Data`{.AgdaFunction} argument we
provide would be required.

In the list of premises of the `UTXOW`{.AgdaDatatype} rule, in the section on
[The UTXOW Transition System](Ledger.Conway.Specification.Utxow.md#sec:the-utxow-transition-system),
the line `inputsDataHashes`{.AgdaBound} `⊆`{.AgdaInductiveConstructor}
`txdatsHashes`{.AgdaBound} compares two inhabitants of type
`PowerSet`{.AgdaFunction} `DataHash`{.AgdaFunction}.  In the Alonzo era, these two
terms inhabited the
`PowerSet`{.AgdaFunction} (`Maybe`{.AgdaDatatype} `DataHash`{.AgdaFunction}) type,
where a `nothing`{.AgdaInductiveConstructor} was simply thrown out
[VK21,](#alonzo-ledger-spec).

# References {#references .unnumbered}

**\[CVG19\]** <span id="shelley-ledger-spec"
label="shelley-ledger-spec"></span> Jared Corduan and Polina Vinogradova
and Matthias Güdemann. *A Formal Specification of the Cardano Ledger*.
2019.

**\[VK21\]** <span id="alonzo-ledger-spec"
label="alonzo-ledger-spec"></span> Polina Vinogradova and Andre Knispel.
*A Formal Specification of the Cardano Ledger integrating Plutus Core*.
2021.

Commit message:

effect Carlos's change requests plus miscellaneous improvements
+ fix mkdocs hang issue
+ move EssentialAgda
+ switch to unicode character for em dash
+ fix broken links
+ revert removal of latex packages in flake (needed for diagram generation)
+ remove repeated console log
+ rename "Agda Essentials" -> "Essential Agda" to agree with module name
+ make reference-able NEWEPOCH section and add link to it
+ improve introduction and remove references to pdf generation

src/Ledger/Conway/Specification/Utxow.lagda.md, after:

---
source_branch: master
source_path: src/Ledger/Conway/Specification/Utxow.lagda
---

# Witnessing {#sec:witnessing}

The purpose of witnessing is make sure the actions specified a transaction are authorized
by the holder of the signing key. (For details see [CVG19](#shelley-ledger-spec).)
This section formalizes the mechanisms use by the Cardano ledger to support witnessing.

<!--
```agda
{-# OPTIONS --safe #-}

open import Ledger.Prelude
open import Ledger.Core.Specification.Crypto
open import Ledger.Conway.Specification.Abstract
open import Ledger.Conway.Specification.Transaction

module Ledger.Conway.Specification.Utxow
  (txs : _) (open TransactionStructure txs)
  (abs : AbstractFunctions txs) (open AbstractFunctions abs)
  where
open import Ledger.Conway.Specification.Utxo txs abs
open import Ledger.Conway.Specification.Script.Validation txs abs
open import Ledger.Conway.Specification.Certs govStructure
```
-->

`allowedLanguages`{.AgdaFunction} has additional conditions for new
features in Conway. If a transaction contains any votes, proposals, a
treasury donation or asserts the treasury amount, it is only allowed to
contain Plutus V3 scripts. Additionally, the presence of reference
scripts or inline scripts does not prevent Plutus V1 scripts from being
used in a transaction anymore. Only inline datums are now disallowed
from appearing together with a Plutus V1 script.


## Witnessing Functions {#sec:witnessing-functions}

<!--
```agda
module _ (o : TxOut) where
  d = proj₁ (proj₂ (proj₂ o))
  data HasInlineDatum : Set where
    InlineDatum  : ∀ {d'} → d ≡ just (inj₁ d') → HasInlineDatum

instance
  Dec-HasInlineDatum : ∀ {o} → HasInlineDatum o ⁇
  Dec-HasInlineDatum {_ , _ , just (inj₁ x) , _} = ⁇ yes (InlineDatum refl)
  Dec-HasInlineDatum {_ , _ , just (inj₂ x) , _} = ⁇ no λ where
    (InlineDatum x) → case x of λ ()
  Dec-HasInlineDatum {_ , _ , nothing , _} = ⁇ no λ where
    (InlineDatum x) → case x of λ ()

module _ (txb : TxBody) (let open TxBody txb) where
  data UsesV3Features : Set where
    HasVotes : txGovVotes ≢ [] → UsesV3Features
    HasProps : txGovProposals ≢ [] → UsesV3Features
    HasDonation : txDonation ≢ 0 → UsesV3Features
    HasTreasure : currentTreasury ≢ nothing → UsesV3Features

instance
  Dec-UsesV3Features : ∀ {txb} → UsesV3Features txb ⁇
  Dec-UsesV3Features {record { txGovVotes = [] ; txGovProposals = [] ; txDonation = zero ; currentTreasury = nothing }}
    = ⁇ no λ where (HasVotes x)    → x refl
                   (HasProps x)    → x refl
                   (HasDonation x) → x refl
                   (HasTreasure x) → x refl
  Dec-UsesV3Features {record { txGovVotes = [] ; txGovProposals = [] ; txDonation = zero ; currentTreasury = just x }}
    = ⁇ yes (HasTreasure (λ ()))
  Dec-UsesV3Features {record { txGovVotes = [] ; txGovProposals = [] ; txDonation = suc txDonation }}
    = ⁇ yes (HasDonation (λ ()))
  Dec-UsesV3Features {record { txGovVotes = [] ; txGovProposals = x ∷ txGovProposals }} = ⁇ yes (HasProps (λ ()))
  Dec-UsesV3Features {record { txGovVotes = x ∷ txGovVotes }} = ⁇ yes (HasVotes (λ ()))

languages : Tx → UTxO → ℙ Language
languages tx utxo = mapPartial getLanguage (txscripts tx utxo)
  where
    getLanguage : Script → Maybe Language
    getLanguage (inj₁ _) = nothing
    getLanguage (inj₂ s) = just (language s)
```
-->

```agda
allowedLanguages : Tx → UTxO → ℙ Language
allowedLanguages tx utxo =
  if (∃[ o ∈ os ] isBootstrapAddr (proj₁ o))
    then ∅
  else if UsesV3Features txb
    then fromList (PlutusV3 ∷ [])
  else if ∃[ o ∈ os ] HasInlineDatum o
    then fromList (PlutusV2 ∷ PlutusV3 ∷ [])
  else
    fromList (PlutusV1 ∷ PlutusV2 ∷ PlutusV3 ∷ [])
  where
    txb = tx .Tx.body; open TxBody txb
    os = range (outs txb) ∪ range (utxo ∣ (txIns ∪ refInputs))
```

## The <span class="AgdaDatatype">UTXOW</span> Transition System {#sec:the-utxow-transition-system}

<!--
```agda

private variable
  Γ     : UTxOEnv
  s s'  : UTxOState
  tx    : Tx

open UTxOState
```
-->

```agda
data _⊢_⇀⦇_,UTXOW⦈_ : UTxOEnv → UTxOState → Tx → UTxOState → Type where

  UTXOW-inductive :
    let  open Tx tx renaming (body to txb); open TxBody txb; open TxWitnesses wits
         utxo                = s .utxo
         witsKeyHashes       = mapˢ hash (dom vkSigs)
         witsScriptHashes    = mapˢ hash scripts
         refScriptHashes     = mapˢ hash (refScripts tx utxo)
         neededScriptHashes  = mapPartial (isScriptObj  ∘ proj₂) (credsNeeded utxo txb)
         neededVKeyHashes    = mapPartial (isKeyHashObj ∘ proj₂) (credsNeeded utxo txb)
         txdatsHashes        = mapˢ hash txdats
         inputsDataHashes    = mapPartial (λ txout →  if txOutToP2Script utxo tx txout
                                                      then txOutToDataHash txout
                                                      else nothing) (range (utxo ∣ txIns))
         refInputsDataHashes = mapPartial txOutToDataHash (range (utxo ∣ refInputs))
         outputsDataHashes   = mapPartial txOutToDataHash (range txOuts)
         nativeScripts       = mapPartial toP1Script (txscripts tx utxo)
    in
    ∙  ∀[ (vk , σ) ∈ vkSigs ] isSigned vk (txidBytes txId) σ
    ∙  ∀[ s ∈ nativeScripts ] (hash s ∈ neededScriptHashes → validP1Script witsKeyHashes txVldt s)
    ∙  neededVKeyHashes ⊆ witsKeyHashes
    ∙  neededScriptHashes - refScriptHashes ≡ᵉ witsScriptHashes
    ∙  inputsDataHashes ⊆ txdatsHashes
    ∙  txdatsHashes ⊆ inputsDataHashes ∪ outputsDataHashes ∪ refInputsDataHashes
    ∙  languages tx utxo ⊆ allowedLanguages tx utxo
    ∙  txADhash ≡ map hash txAD
    ∙  Γ ⊢ s ⇀⦇ tx ,UTXO⦈ s'
       ────────────────────────────────
       Γ ⊢ s ⇀⦇ tx ,UTXOW⦈ s'
```

**Remarks**

+  the line `inputsDataHashes`{.AgdaBound} `⊆`{.AgdaInductiveConstructor} `txdatsHashes`{.AgdaBound}
   compares two inhabitants of type `PowerSet`{.AgdaFunction} `DataHash`{.AgdaFunction}.
   In the Alonzo era, these two terms inhabited the `PowerSet`{.AgdaFunction}
   (`Maybe`{.AgdaDatatype} `DataHash`{.AgdaFunction}) type, where a
   `nothing`{.AgdaInductiveConstructor} was simply thrown out [VK21,](#alonzo-ledger-spec).

+  `neededScriptHashes`{.AgdaBound} and `neededVKeyHashes`{.AgdaBound} are
   defined by projecting information out of `credsNeeded`{.AgdaFunction}.  Also, the
   last component of the `credsNeeded`{.AgdaFunction} function (defined in the
   [Script Validation][] module) adds the script in the proposal policy only if it is present.

<!--
```agda
pattern UTXOW-inductive⋯ p₁ p₂ p₃ p₄ p₅ p₆ p₇ p₈ h
      = UTXOW-inductive (p₁ , p₂ , p₃ , p₄ , p₅ , p₆ , p₇ , p₈ , h)
pattern UTXOW⇒UTXO x = UTXOW-inductive⋯ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ x

unquoteDecl UTXOW-inductive-premises =
  genPremises UTXOW-inductive-premises (quote UTXOW-inductive)
```
-->


!!! note "Plutus Script Context"

    [CIP-0069](https://cips.cardano.org/cip-0069) unifies the arguments
    given to all types of Plutus scripts currently available: spending,
    certifying, rewarding, minting, voting, proposing.

    The formal specification permits running spending scripts in the absence datums in
    the Conway era.  However, since the interface with Plutus is kept abstract in this
    specification, changes to the representation of the script context which are part of
    [CIP-0069](https://cips.cardano.org/cip-0069) are not included here.

    To supply this specification with a
    [CIP-0069](https://cips.cardano.org/cip-0069)-conformant implementation of Plutus, an
    additional step processing the `List`{.AgdaDatatype} `Data`{.AgdaFunction} argument
    we provide would be required.

# References {#references .unnumbered}

**\[CVG19\]** <span id="shelley-ledger-spec"
label="shelley-ledger-spec"></span> Jared Corduan and Polina Vinogradova
and Matthias Güdemann. *A Formal Specification of the Cardano Ledger*.
2019.

**\[VK21\]** <span id="alonzo-ledger-spec"
label="alonzo-ledger-spec"></span> Polina Vinogradova and Andre Knispel.
*A Formal Specification of the Cardano Ledger integrating Plutus Core*.
2021.
